# Angular Elements with Standalone Components

Since Angular 14.2, it's possible to use Standalone Components as Angular Elements. In this chapter, I'm going to show you, how this new feature works. 

📂 [Source Code](https://github.com/manfredsteyer/standalone-components-elements)

## Providing a Standalone Component

The Standalone Component I'm going to use here is a simple Toggle Button called ``ToggleComponent``:

```typescript
import { Component, EventEmitter, Input, Output, ViewEncapsulation } from '@angular/core';
import { CommonModule } from '@angular/common';

@Component({
  selector: 'app-toggle',
  standalone: true,
  imports: [],
  template: `
    <div class="toggle" [class.active]="active" (click)="toggle()">
      <slot>Toggle!</slot>
    </div>
  `,
  styles: [`
    .toggle {
      padding:10px;
      border: solid black 1px;
      cursor: pointer;
      display: inline
    }

    .active {
      background-color: lightsteelblue;
    }
  `],
  encapsulation: ViewEncapsulation.ShadowDom
})
export class ToggleComponent {

  @Input() active = false;
  @Output() change = new EventEmitter<boolean>();

  toggle(): void {
    this.active = !this.active;
    this.change.emit(this.active);
  }

}
```

By setting encapsulation to ``ViewEncapsulation.ShadowDom``, I'm making the browser to use "real" Shadow DOM instead of Angular's emulated counterpart. However, this also means that we have to use the Browser's ``slot`` API for content projection instead of Angular's ``ng-content``.

## Installing Angular Elements

While Angular Elements is directly provided by the Angular team, the CLI doesn't install it. Hence, we need to do this by hand:

```bash
npm i @angular/elements
```

In former days, ``@angular/elements`` also supported ``ng add``. This support came with a schematic for adding a needed polyfill. However, meanwhile, all browsers supported by Angular can deal with Web Components natively. Hence, there is no need for such a polyfill anymore and so the support for ``ng add`` was already removed some versions ago.


## Bootstrapping with Angular Elements

Now, let's bootstrap our application and expose the ``ToggleComponent`` as a Web Component (Custom Element) with Angular Elements. For this, we can use the function ``createApplication`` added with Angular 14.2:

```typescript
// main.ts

import { createCustomElement } from '@angular/elements';
import { createApplication } from '@angular/platform-browser';
import { ToggleComponent } from './app/toggle/toggle.component';

(async () => {

  const app = await createApplication({
    providers: [
      /* your global providers here */
    ],
  });

  const toogleElement = createCustomElement(ToggleComponent, {
    injector: app.injector,
  });

  customElements.define('my-toggle', toogleElement);

})();
```

We could pass an array with providers to ``createApplication``. This allows to provide services like the ``HttpClient`` via the application's root scope. In general, this option is needed when we want to configure these providers, e. g. with a ``forRoot`` method or a ``provideXYZ`` function. In all other cases, it's preferable to just go with tree-shakable providers (``providedIn: 'root'``).

The result of ``createApplication`` is a new ``ApplicationRef``. We can pass it's Injector alongside the ``ToggleComponent`` to ``createCustomElement``. The result is a custom element that can be registered with the browser using ``customElements.define``.

Please note that the current API does not allow for setting an own zone instance like the ``noop`` zone. Instead, the Angular team wants to concentrate on new features for zone-less change detection in the future.

## Side Note: Bootstrapping Multiple Components

The API shown also allows to create several custom elements:

```typescript
const element1 = createCustomElement(ThisComponent, {
    injector: app.injector,
});

const element2 = createCustomElement(ThatComponent, {
    injector: app.injector,
});
```

Besides working with custom elements, the ``ApplicationRef`` at hand also allows for bootstrapping several components as Angular applications:

```typescript
app.injector.get(NgZone).run(() => {
    app.bootstrap(ToggleComponent, 'my-a');
    app.bootstrap(ToggleComponent, 'my-b');
});
```

When bootstrapping a component this way, one can overwrite the selector to use. Please note, that one has to call ``bootstrap`` within a zone in order to get change detection. 

Bootstrapping several components was originally done by placing several components in your ``AppModule``'s ``bootstrap`` array. The ``bootstrapApplication`` function used for bootstrapping Standalone Components does, however, not allow for this as the goal was to provide a simple API for the most common use case.

## Calling an Angular Element

To call our Angular Element, we just need to place a respective tag in our ``index.html``:

```html
<h1>Standalone Angular Element Demo</h1>
<my-toggle id="myToggle">Click me!</my-toggle>
```

As a custom element is threaded by the browser as a normal DOM node, we can use traditional DOM calls to set up events and to assign values to properties:

```html
<script>
  const myToggle = document.getElementById('myToggle');
  
  myToggle.addEventListener('change', (event) => {
    console.log('active', event.detail);
  });

  setTimeout(() => {
    myToggle.active = true; 
  }, 3000);
</script>
```

## Calling a Web Component in an Angular Component

If we call a web component within an Angular component, we can directly data bind to it using brackets for properties and parenthesis for events. This works regardless whether the web component was created with Angular or not. 

To demonstrate this, let's assume we have the following AppComponent:

```typescript
import { Component, CUSTOM_ELEMENTS_SCHEMA } from '@angular/core';

@Component({
  selector: 'app-root',
  standalone: true,
  schemas: [CUSTOM_ELEMENTS_SCHEMA],
  template: `
    <h2>Root Component</h2>
    <my-toggle 
        [active]="active" 
        (change)="change($event)">
        Hello!
    </my-toggle>
  `,
})
export class AppComponent {
    active = false;
    change(event: Event) {
        const customEvent = event as CustomEvent<boolean>;
        console.log('active', customEvent.detail);
    }
}
```

This Standalone Component calls our ``my-toggle`` web component. While the Angular compiler is aware of all possible Angular components, it doesn't know about web components. Hence, it would throw an error when seeing the ``my-toggle`` tag. To avoid this, we need to register the ``CUSTOM_ELEMENTS_SCHEMA`` schema. 

Before, we did this with all the NgModules we wanted to use together with Web Components. Now, we can directly register this schema with Standalone Components. Technically, this just disables the compiler checks regarding possible tag names. This is binary - the checks are either on or off -- and there is no way to directly tell the compiler about the available web components. 

To make this component appear on our page, we need to bootstrap it:

```typescript
// main.ts

[...]
// Register web components ...
[...]

app.injector.get(NgZone).run(() => {
  app.bootstrap(AppComponent);
});
```

Also, we need to add an element for AppComponent to the index.html:

```html
<app-root></app-root>
```

## Bonus: Compiling Self-contained Bundle

Now, let's assume, we only provide a custom element and don't bootstrap our ``AppComponent``. In order to use this custom element in other applications, we need to compile it into a self contained bundle. While the default webpack-based builder emits several bundles, e. g. a main bundle and a runtime bundle, the new -- still experimental -- esbuild-based one just gives us one bundle for our source code and another one for the polyfills.

To activate it, adjust your project settings in your ``angular.json`` as follows:

```json
"build": {
    "builder": "@angular-devkit/build-angular:browser-esbuild",
    [...]
}
```

Normally, you just have to add ``-esbuild`` at the end of the default builder.

The resulting bundles look like this:

```bash
     948 favicon.ico
     703 index.html
 100 177 main.43BPAPVS.js
  33 916 polyfills.M7XCYQVG.js
       0 styles.VFXLKGBH.css
```

If you use your web component in an other web site, e. g. a CMS-driven one, just reference the main bundle there and add a respective tag. Also, reference the polyfills. However, when using several such bundles, you have to make sure, you only load the polyfills once.